Ulithi , , or <ref> urltoken "Ulithi". Yapese Dictionary: English Finderlist. Updated 27 July 2012. Retrieved 25 November 2013.</ref>) is an atoll in the Caroline Islands of the western Pacific Ocean, about east of Yap. It consists of 40 islets totalling , surrounding a lagoon about long and up to wide—at one of the largest in the world. It is administered by the Yap State in the Federated States of Micronesia. Ulithi's population was 773 in 2000. There are four inhabited islands on Ulithi Atoll. They are Falalop , Asor (Yasor), Mogmog (Mwagmwog), and Fedarai (Fedraey). Falalop is the most accessible with Ulithi Airport, a small resort hotel, store and one of three public high schools in Yap state. Mogmog is the seat of the high chief of Ulithi Atoll though each island has its own chief. Other important islands are Losiap , Sorlen (Sohl'oay), and Potangeras (Potoangroas).
 
The atoll is in the westernmost of the Caroline Islands, southwest of Guam, east of the Philippines and south of Tokyo. It is a typical volcanic atoll, with a coral reef, white sand beaches and palm trees. Ulithi's forty small islands barely rise above the sea, with the largest being only in area. However the reef runs roughly north and south, by across, enclosing a vast anchorage with an average depth of .
Ulithi was a major staging area for the United States Navy in the final year of the Second World War. Several sunken warships rest at the bottom of the Ulithi lagoon, including , a fleet oiler which sank fully loaded.<ref></ref><ref name=Mississinewa></ref> The sunken oiler was found to be seeping oil into the lagoon. The United States Navy responded, locating the oiler, tapping her storage tanks, and pumped off her oil. The cleanup operation was completed in February 2003.
Given permission from the local community, the atoll offers good diving. Reef damage from Typhoon Maysak in 2015 is still visible in places, but the reefs have largely recovered.
Census records can be misleading because population can fluctuate during the year because it is common for Ulithians to leave for work or school abroad and to return. This is particularly true during festive times like the Outer Island High School graduation ceremony, when the population can increase considerably. Additionally, during events like weddings and funerals, community populations may double.
Electricity is now available on some islands, and the advent of video players and cell phones have brought a touch of the outside world to this very isolated atoll. Occasional diving and adventure tours visit Ulithi from Yap.