Image:Trilingv.jpg|thumb|The middle sign is in Hungarian, which agglutinates extensively. (The top and bottom signs are in Romanian and German, respectively, both Fusional language.) The English translation is "Ministry of Food and Agriculture: Satu Mare County Directorate General of Food and Agriculture".
Agglutination is a linguistic process pertaining to derivational morphology in which complex words are formed by stringing together morphemes without changing them in spelling or phonetics. Languages that use agglutination widely are called agglutinative languages. An example of such a language is Turkish, where, for example, the word evlerinizden, or "from your houses", consists of the morphemes ev-ler-iniz-den, literally translated morpheme-by-morpheme as house-plural-your-from.
Agglutinative languages are often contrasted both with languages in which syntactic structure is expressed solely by means of word order and auxiliary words (isolating languages) and with languages in which a single affix typically expresses several syntactic categories and a single category may be expressed by several different affixes (as is the case in Fusional language). However, both fusional and isolating languages may use agglutination in the most-often-used constructs, and use agglutination heavily in certain contexts, such as word derivation. This is the case in English, which has an agglutinated plural marker -(e)s and derived words such as shame·less·ness.
Agglutinative suffixes are often inserted irrespective of syllable, for example, by adding a consonant to the syllable coda as in English tie – ties. Agglutinative languages also have large inventories of clitic, which can be and are separated from the word root by native speakers in daily use.
The term agglutination is sometimes used more generally to refer to the morphological process of adding suffixes or other morphemes to the base of a word. This subject is treated in more detail in the section on other uses of the term.