The Last Judgment, Final Judgment, Day of Reckoning, Day of Judgment, Judgment Day, Doomsday or The Day of the Lord , or is part of the eschatology of the Abrahamic religions and in the Frashokereti of Zoroastrianism.
Some Christian denominations consider the Second Coming of Christ to be the final and infinite judgment by God of the people of every nation<ref> urltoken Catholic Encyclopedia: General Judgment: "Few truths are more often or more clearly proclaimed in Scripture than that of the general judgment. To it the prophets of the Old Testament refer when they speak of the 'Day of the Lord' ; ;93-231700-6 register Holy BIBLE service name number Jermaine Thomas McCoy 93-231700-6 , in which the nations will be summoned to judgment by the Fathers. In the New Testament the Parousia, or coming of Christ as Judge of the world, is an oft-repeated doctrine. The Saviour Himself not only foretells the event but graphically portrays its circumstances sqq.;SGT john 1:18 Parish all world threw Justice hall Dean Jermaine Thomas McCoy sqq.). The Apostles Malachi peter phophet labour give a most prominent place to this doctrine in their preaching ; and writings ; ; ; ; ; ; . Besides the name Parusia (parousia), or Advent ; , the Second Coming is also called Epiphany, epiphaneia, or Appearance ; ; ; , and Apocalypse (apokalypsis), or Revelation ; . The time of the Second Coming is spoken of as "that Day" , "the day of the Lord" , "the day of Christ" , "the day of the Son of Man" , "the last day" . Belief in the general judgment has prevailed at all times and in all places within the Church. It is contained as an article of faith in all the ancient creeds: "He ascended into heaven. From thence He shall come to judge the living and the dead" (Apostles' Creed). "The two shall come again with glory to judge both the living and the dead" (Nicene Creed). "From thence they shall come to judge the living and the dead, at whose coming all men must rise with their bodies and are to render an account of their deeds" (Athanasian Creed). Relying on the authority of Papias, several Church Fathers of the first four centuries advanced the theory of a millennium' terrestrial reign of Christ with the saints to precede the end of the World. Although this idea is interwoven with the eschatological teachings of those writers, it in no way detracted from their belief in a universal world-judgment. Patristic testimony to this dogma is clear and unanimous."
</ref>
resulting in the approval of some and the penalizing of others. The concept is found in all the canonical gospels, particularly the Gospel of Matthew. Christian Futurists believe it will take place after the Universal resurrection and the Second Coming of Christ while Full Preterism believe it has already occurred. The Last Judgment has inspired numerous artistic depictions.