A central business district (CBD) is the commercial and business center of a city. It contains commercial space and offices. In larger cities, it is often synonymous with the city's "financial district". Geographically, it often coincides with the "city center" or "downtown", but the concepts are not mutually exclusive: many cities have a central business district located away from its commercial and or cultural center and or downtown/city center, or even several CBDs at once. For instance, London's city center is usually regarded as encompassing the historic City of London and the medieval City of Westminster, while the City of London and the transformed Docklands area containing Canary Wharf are regarded as its two respective CBDs. In New York City, Midtown Manhattan is the largest central business district in the city and in the world. In Chicago, the Chicago Loop is the second largest central business district in the United States and in the world. It is also referred to as the core of the city's downtown. Mexico City also has its own historic city center, the colonial-era "Centro Histórico," along with two CBDs: the mid-late 20th century Paseo de la Reforma – Polanco, and the new Santa Fe, respectively. Moscow and Russia's largest central business district is the Moscow International Business Center.
The shape and type of a CBD almost always closely reflect the city's history. Cities with strong preservation laws and maximum building height restrictions to retain the character of the historic and cultural core will have a CBD quite a distance from the city center. This practice is quite common for European cities such as Paris, Moscow, or Vienna. In cities in the New World that grew quickly after the invention of modern transportation such as road or rail, a single central area or downtown will often contain most of the region's tallest buildings and act both as the CBD and the commercial and cultural city center. Increasing urbanization in the 21st century have developed Megacity, particularly in Asia, that will often have multiple CBDs scattered across the urban area. It has been said that downtowns (as understood in North America) are therefore conceptually distinct from both CBDs and city centers.<ref>" urltoken Reviving American downtowns". The Economist. 1 March 2007.</ref> Although no two CBDs look alike in terms of their spatial shape, however, certain geometric patterns in these areas are recurring throughout many cities due to the nature of centralized commercial and industrial activities.<ref></ref>