In chemistry, a conjugated system is a system of connected p-orbitals with delocalized electrons in a molecule, which in general lowers the overall energy of the molecule and increases stability. It is Resonance (chemistry) as having alternating single and multiple bonds. Lone pairs, radicals or carbenium ions may be part of the system, which may be cyclic, acyclic, linear or mixed. The term "conjugated" was coined in 1899 by the German chemist Johannes Thiele.<ref> On p. 90, Thiele coined the term "conjugated": "Ein solches System benachbarter Doppelbindungen mit ausgeglichenen inneren Partialvalenzen sei als conjugirt bezeichnet." (Such a system of adjacent double bonds with equalized inner partial valences shall be termed "conjugated".)</ref>
Conjugation is the overlap of one p orbital with another across an adjacent 
σ bond (in transition metals d orbitals can be involved).<ref></ref><ref>For the purposes of this article, we are primarily concerned with delocalized orbitals with π symmetry. This is in line with the typical usage of 'conjugated system' to refer to π (and not σ) delocalization. Canonical molecular orbitals are fully delocalized, so in a sense, all electrons involved in bonding, including ones making up the σ bonds and lone pairs, are delocalized throughout the molecule. However, while treating π electrons as delocalized yields many useful insights into chemical reactivity, treatment of σ and nonbonding electrons in the same way is generally less profitable, except in cases of multicenter σ bonding as found in cluster compounds of Li and B. Moreover, the added complexity tends to impede chemical intuition. Hence, for most organic molecules, chemists commonly use a localized orbital model to describe the σ bonds and lone pairs, while superimposing delocalized molecular orbitals to describe the π bonding. This view has the added advantage that there is a clear correspondence between the Lewis structure of a molecule and the orbitals used to describe its bonding.</ref>
A conjugated system has a region of overlapping p orbitals, bridging the interjacent locations that simple diagrams illustrate as not having a π bond. They allow a delocalization of π electrons across all the adjacent aligned p orbitals.<ref></ref>
The π electrons do not belong to a single bond or atom, but rather to a group of atoms.
The largest conjugated systems are found in graphene, graphite, conductive polymers and carbon nanotubes.