The siege of Boston (April 19, 1775 – March 17, 1776) was the opening phase of the American Revolutionary War.<ref></ref> New England militiamen prevented the movement by land of the British Army, which was garrisoned in what was then the peninsular city of Boston, Massachusetts Bay. Both sides had to deal with resource supply and personnel issues over the course of the siege. British resupply and reinforcement activities were limited to sea access, which was impeded by American vessels. After eleven months of the siege, the British abandoned Boston and sailed their ships, troops and equipment to Nova Scotia.
The siege began on April 19 after the Battles of Lexington and Concord, when the militia from surrounding Massachusetts communities blocked land access to Boston. The Continental Congress formed the Continental Army from the militia, with George Washington as its Commander in Chief. In June 1775, the British Battle of Bunker Hill, from which the Continentals were preparing to bombard the city, but their casualties were heavy and their gains were insufficient to break the Continental Army's hold on land access to Boston. The Americans laid siege to the British-occupied city. Military actions during the remainder of the siege were limited to occasional raids, minor skirmishes, and sniper fire. American war parties, however, both by land and in watercraft that were smaller and more nimble than the larger British ships, interfered with British foraging efforts. Also, American merchant vessels fitted with cannons were able to interdict transatlantic resupply efforts. Consequently, the British troops stationed in Boston suffered privation of food and fuel during the siege.
In November 1775, George Washington sent the 25-year-old bookseller-turned-soldier Henry Knox to bring to Boston the heavy artillery that had been Capture of Fort Ticonderoga. In a technically complex and demanding operation, Knox Noble train of artillery by January 1776. In March 1776, these artillery fortified Dorchester Heights (which overlooked Boston and its harbor), thereby threatening the British supply lifeline. The British commander William Howe saw the British position as indefensible and withdrew the British forces in Boston to the British stronghold at Halifax, Nova Scotia, on March 17.