Túrin Turambar (pronounced is a fictional character in J. R. R. Tolkien's legendarium. "Turambar and the Foalókë", begun in 1917, is the first appearance of Túrin in the legendarium. J. R. R. Tolkien consciously based the story on the medieval tale of Kullervo in the Finnish mythological poem Kalevala compiled by Elias Lönnrot, saying that it was "an attempt to reorganize.the tale of Kullervo the hapless, into a form of my own".<ref group=T>Letters, p. 214</ref> Also called "The Tale of Grief", "Narn i Chîn Húrin", commonly called "The Narn", it tells of the tragic fates of the children of Húrin, namely his son Túrin (Turambar) and his daughter Nienor. Excerpts of the story have been published over the years, in The Silmarillion (prose), Unfinished Tales (prose), The Book of Lost Tales Part II (prose), The Lays of Beleriand (verse in alliterative long-lines) and most recently in 1994 in The War of the Jewels (prose), the latter three part of The History of Middle-earth series.
Túrin Turambar is the primary protagonist and tragic hero of the novel The Children of Húrin, published after Tolkien's death by his son Christopher Tolkien and drawing from many of the above sources to finally present a complete narrative. His title, "Turambar", means master of fate. Later, on his tombstone, it was written, ".Master of Fate, yet by fate mastered," concluding his tragedy, and ultimately showing his failure to achieve his goals of escaping the curse ill fate Morgoth had cast upon him.
In the books, Túrin was a Man of the First Age of Middle-earth, whose family had been cursed by the ultimate evil being of the legendarium, Morgoth. In course of his unsuccessful attempts to defy the curse, Túrin brought ruin upon several Mannish and Elven strongholds as well as upon himself and his sister Niënor Níniel. Their history was recorded in the Tale of the Children of Húrin or Narn i Chîn Húrin, which was claimed by Tolkien to be the ultimate source of the published writings.<ref group=T name="MR1">Morgoth's Ring, "Myths Transformed" (I), p. 373 and note 2</ref>
Túrin is briefly mentioned in The Fellowship of the Ring, but little more is said than that he was one of "the mighty Elf-friends of old". In The Two Towers, his name is briefly mentioned as a strong warrior.