The Thracians ; Thrāikes; were an Indo-European people who inhabited large parts of Eastern and Southeast Europe in ancient history.<ref name="Webber_Definition">. "The Thracians were an Indo-European people who occupied the area between northern Greece, southern Russia, and north-western Turkey. They shared the same language and culture. There may have been as many as a million Thracians, diveded among up to 40 tribes."</ref><ref>. "One of the best documented Indo-European civilizations that inhabited Bulgaria is the Thracians."</ref> Thracians resided mainly in the Balkans, but were also located in Asia Minor and other locations in Eastern Europe. 
The exact origin of Thracians is unknown, but it is believed that proto-Thracians descended from a mixture of Indo-Europeans and Neolithic Europe during the second millennium BC. The proto-Thracian culture developed into the Dacian and Thracian culture.
Thracian culture was described as Tribe by the Ancient Greece and Romans. They remained largely disunited with the first permanent state being the Odrysian kingdom in the fifth century BC. They faced subjugation by the Achaemenid Empire around the same time. Thracians experienced a short period of peace after the Persians were defeated by the Greeks in the Persian Wars. The Odrysian kingdom lost independence to Macedonia in the late 4th century BC, and never regained total independence following Alexander the Great's death.
The Thracians faced conquest by the Romans in the mid second century BC under whom they faced internal strife. They composed major parts of rebellions against the Romans along with the Macedonians until the Third Macedonian War. Thracians were integrated into Roman society and later converted to Christianity. The last reported use of a Thracian language was by monks in the sixth century AD.
Thracians were described as "warlike" and "barbarians" by the Greeks and Romans and were favored as mercenaries. Ancient descriptions of a vicious people are disputed and archaeology has been used since the mid-twentieth century in southern Bulgaria to identify more about them.
Thracians spoke the extinct Thracian language and shared a common culture.<ref name="Webber_Definition" /> They followed a Polytheism with the exception of the Monotheism Dacians who worshipped Zalmoxis. The study of the Thracians is known as Thracology.