Herman Dooyeweerd (7 October 1894, Amsterdam – 12 February 1977, Amsterdam) was a professor of law and jurisprudence at the VU_University_Amsterdam from 1926 to 1965. He was also a philosopher and principal founder of Reformational philosophy<ref>Several names for Dooyeweerd's system have appeared over the last few decades. His original De Wijsbegeerte der Wetsidee (3 vols., Amsterdam: H.J. Paris, 1935-6) translates as "The Philosophy of the Law-Idea". However, Dooyeweerd wrote in his later New Critique of Theoretical Thought that the "best English term corresponding to it seems to be ‘cosmonomic Idea’, since the word ‘law’ used without further specification would evoke a special juridical sense which, of course, cannot be meant here" (NC I, 93). While this phrase has been popular among Dooyeweerd scholars, some have also used the phrase "law framework philosophy", such as Roy Clouser (cf. Clouser 2005, 2010) and Adolfo Garcia de la Sienra Guajardo (cf. Garcia de la Sienra 2010).</ref> with Dirk Vollenhoven,<ref>While many Dooyeweerd scholars believe Dooyeweerd's thought to be compatible with that of Vollenhoven, others have cast doubt on such a view. For the former view, see Wolters (1985). For the latter, see Friesen (2005).</ref> a significant development within the Neocalvinist (or Kuyperian) school of thought. Dooyeweerd made several contributions to philosophy and other academic disciplines concerning the nature of diversity and coherence in everyday experience, the transcendental conditions for theoretical thought, the relationship between religion, philosophy, and scientific theory, and an understanding of meaning, being, time and self.
Dooyeweerd is most famous for his suite of fifteen aspects (or 'modalities', 'modal aspects', or 'modal law-spheres'), which are distinct ways in which reality exists, has meaning, is experienced, and occurs. This suite of aspects is finding application in practical analysis, research and teaching in such diverse fields as built environment, sustainability, agriculture, business, information systems and development. Danie Strauss, the editor of Dooyeweerd's Collected Works, has provided a systematic look at Dooyeweerd's philosophy urltoken here.