The Kingdom of Travancore Malayalam: തിരുവിതാംകൂർ/ Tamil: திருவிதாங்கூர்), also known as the Kingdom of Thiruvithamkoor, was an Indian kingdom from c. 1729 until 1949. It was ruled by the Travancore Royal Family from Padmanabhapuram, and later Thiruvananthapuram. At its zenith, the kingdom covered most of modern-day southern Kerala, parts of central Kerala, and the southernmost part of modern-day Tamil Nadu (Kanyakumari district) with the Thachudaya Kaimal's enclave of Irinjalakuda Koodalmanikyam temple in the neighbouring Kingdom of Cochin.<ref>British Archives urltoken 
The official flag of the state was red with a dextrally-coiled silver Shankha (Turbinella pyrum) at its center. The coat of arms had two elephants standing on the left and right with the conch shell (Turbinella pyrum) in the center. The ribbon (white) with black Devanagari script.
King Marthanda Varma inherited the small feudal state of Venad in 1723 and built it into Travancore, one of the most powerful kingdoms in South India. Marthanda Varma led the Travancore forces during the Travancore-Dutch War of 1739–46, which culminated in the Battle of Colachel. The defeat of the Dutch by Travancore is considered the earliest example of an organised power from Asia overcoming European military technology and tactics.<ref name="Sanyal2016"></ref> Marthanda Varma went on to conquer most of the petty principalities of the native rulers .
In the early 19th century, the kingdom became a princely state of the British Empire. The Travancore Government took many progressive steps on the socio-economic front and during the reign of Maharajah Sri Chithira Thirunal Balarama Varma, Travancore became a prosperous modern princely state in British Raj, with reputed achievements in education, political administration, public work, and social reforms.<ref name="Travancore 2011">"Travancore." Encyclopædia Britannica. Encyclopædia Britannica Online. Encyclopædia Britannica Inc., 2011. Web. 11 November 2011.</ref><ref>Chandra Mallampalli, Christians and Public Life in Colonial South India, 1863–1937: Contending with Marginality, RoutledgeCurzon, 2004, p. 30</ref> In 1903–1904 the total revenue of the state was Rs.1,02,01,900.<ref> urltoken