Taja Kramberger (born 11 September 1970) is a Slovenian poet, translator, essayist and historical anthropologist from Slovenia. She lives in France.
Kramberger was born in Ljubljana, Slovenia. She completed undergraduate studies in history at the University of Ljubljana, where she also studied archaeology, abandoning this latter when she became engaged in the literary field (1995). She enrolled postgraduate history studies in 1997 and was from then on till 2010 (when a university purge of critical intellectuals was executed at the University of Primorska)<ref></ref> a steady and active member of the university research, editorial and pedagogical circles in Slovenia. She obtained her PhD in 2009 from history/historical anthropology at the University of Primorska with a thesis entitled Memory and Remembrance. Historical Anthropology of the Canonized Reception.<ref></ref>
She was an initiator and for ten years editor-in-chief of Monitor ISH-Review of Humanities and Social Sciences (2001–2003), in 2004 renamed to Monitor ZSA-Review for Historical, Social and Other Anthropologies (2004–2010).<ref>Last two numbers of Monitor ZSA are available here and here </ref> Between 2004 and 2007 she was a president of the TROPOS-Association for Historical, Social and Other Anthropologies and for Cultural Activities (Ljubljana, Slovenia).
She publishes monographs in the areas of epistemology of social sciences and historiography, history and historical anthropology of various subjects for the period between 18th to mid-20th Centuries. She is also an internationally acclaimed writer, she writes literary books, literary studies and essays. She translates texts from all fields mentioned from English, French, Italian and Spanish to Slovenian language.
She earned some scientific and literary fellowships abroad at the École des hautes études en sciences sociales and in Paris, at in Budapest, from in Ottensheim, Austria, from in Canada. She also publishes science and literary articles, essays and translations. She participates at international scientific and literary conferences, research projects, and is a member of some professional associations and organizations. She helped in organization of some international conferences, as for example in the case of conference Territorial and Imaginary Frontiers and Identities from Antiquity until Today, accent on Balkans (2002 in Ljubljana) and international scientific conference of the Francophonie (AUF) titled Histoire de l’oubli/History of Oblivion (2008 in Koper).
Her research fields are: epistemology of historiography and social sciences, historical anthropology,<ref></ref> contemporary history from Enlightenment to mid-20th century, transmission and politics of memory/oblivion, intellectual history and cultural transfers in Europe, anti-intellectualism, dimensions and representations of the Dreyfus Affair in Slovenian social Space and in Trieste, mechanisms of social exclusion, extermination, genocide and Shoah/Holocaust studies, anthropology of sex and gender, constitution of (national and transnational) literary fields<ref></ref> in Europe in 19th and 20th Centuries, studies of province and provincialism as a specific socio-historical phenomenon.
Since October 2012 she lives in France together with her husband Drago Braco Rotar, professor of sociology, historical anthropology, translator and a renowned public intellectual in Slovenia and Yugoslavia - who during the 1980s and early 1900s established many key institutions in Slovenia and led them for years (to name only three most important: the now classical green translation edition Studia humanitatis,<ref></ref> the first private postgraduate school ISH-Institutum Studiorum Humanitatis, Faculty of Graduate Studies in Human Sciences, where he designed and launched the program of historical anthropology).<ref></ref>