<noinclude></noinclude>
Image:Emailuser location.png|right|thumb|alt=Image of Wikipedia user page with "Email this user" link highlighted under "toolbox" heading.|"Email this user" is available from the "toolbox" on the left of the screen, when any Wikipedia:User page is viewed.
This page sets out information on the Special:EmailUser feature, a MediaWiki feature that allows registered users to exchange emails with other registered users privately ("off-wiki").
Users can send emails to other users via the built-in email facility on Wikipedia and any of its sister websites. Both the sender and recipient must have provided email addresses in their preferences. The sender's username and email address are disclosed but not their IP address. <span style="color:red;">(Note that "the wrong way" disclose personal information—see Privacy issues below for how to avoid this if needed, when you reply)</span>. 
Emails sent using Wikimedia's mail facility are private. Their contents cannot be read by administrators or anyone else, even to check for appropriateness, so only limited help is possible if the feature is being abused. It is possible for users able to access the WP:CHK tool to confirm if and when a user sent any emails, but not the content of the emails. In the event of WP:HARASS through this facility, users may contact any WP:ADMIN for advice and assistance (by email or any other way, if they wish, in order to keep it private). In more serious cases they should email the WP:OTRS for help.
Users have the right to disable the email facility on their account at any time (and can ask users who email them to communicate on-wiki instead), although users active in roles that require accepting of user email should probably consult appropriately first (on or off wiki). Use of the email facility can also be disabled by any administrator as part of WP:BLOCK an account, although usually this is only done if the blocked user has abused or is likely to abuse the email facility. 
There are some important "best practices" about this facility – Wikipedia is designed to work based upon public dialog, so communication between users is often better if it's in public (on users' WP:TP or elsewhere on Wikipedia's WP:TP), where others can review and note them. This is especially the case where improper use might later be claimed (WP:CANVASS, WP:HARASS and so on); this would not be possible to claim if the posts are on the website itself. Also, unlike messages on the website, messages via email are not subject to Wikipedia's free license and therefore are copyright by their sender, and should not be pasted onto the website in a way that breaches WP:COPYRIGHT.